# Hierarchical Observer

HObserver is an extension of the `java.util.Observable` class and it's supporting framework that allows Observables to 
be part of an hierarchy such that events fired to any observable are also fired to its ancestors.

#Observer Pattern

`Observable` is an implementation of the GOF (Gang of Four) "Observer" pattern. An "Observable" provides an API with which
"Observers" can register themselves for notification whenever the Observable is changed.   Since Observers register with 
Observable, the Observer is unaware of and thus decouple from its observers.

For example, in a typical AJAX web application changing the name of some domain entity may require re-rendering in another 
part of the DOM where the name is displayed.   Let's say we have a web app that maintains a contact list.   Whenever the 
name of  a contact is changed, we might need to update any place where names are used.   Such places would register
themselves as observers of the the contact list.

#What is an Hierarchical Observer?

Suppose we wanted finer grained control over the update notification.   For example, if we have a component that only
displays the name, we don't need (nor "want") the expense of re-rendering if the thing that changed was the contact's 
phone number.

HObserver expands on the design pattern by introducing the notion of Observables that are part of a tree of Observables.  
The tree reflects the logical structure of the domain objects.   Each Observable in the tree C might have a parent Observable
P.   Anytime a notification is sent to observers of C, notifications are also sent to observers of all ancestors of C.

It might be best to explain this in terms of our contact list example.  

Here's a potential organization of the tree of oberservables:

- Contact List
   - Contact
      - Name
      - Phone numbers
        - Work Phone
        - Home Phone
      - Address
         - Country

Every time a contact's Home Phone is changed, all observers of the "Home Phone" Observable are notified.   But an observer who registered as an observer of "Phone Numbers" will also get a notification when the "Home Phone" is changed, or any
phone number.

Observers can also register for notification of changes to ANY part of a contact by registering with "Contact". And if you have something that wants to be notified whenever any part of a contact changes, or whenever the list itself 
changes (via addition and deletion) there is that option as well.

This example is admittedly contrived and overkill but contrived overkill examples are usually the most helpful.

#What is the Logging Observer?

The Logging Observer provides an easy way to create Log File entries in response to changes to an Observable. This is accomplished via a builtin Observer that writes a Log File entry for each change to the Observable via the SLF4J API.

The LoggingObserver instantiates a Logger using the built in Logger Factory and then events are processed by the LoggingObserver class and the proper log message is outputted through the log. The loggingObserver can write the data to different log levels such as DEBUG and INFO. 

To Be Added: Example of a Logging Observer implementation

#What is the Collection Observable?

Collection Observable allows for observers to be fired an event that not only provides information about the data changed in the collection of data, but also the operation executed onto the collection. 

Collection Observable is an extension of the *BaseHObservable* class. *AbstractCollectionObservable* is an abstract class that has sub classes that extend it which use different data structures for their collections. The abstract class also implements the `Collection` Interface.

- *HObservable*
	- *BaseHObservable*
      - *AbstractCollectionObservable*
	      - *ListObservable*
	      - *SetObservable*

Suppose a collection observable that uses an ArrayList, a type of collection for its collection, can add or remove data from its list. If data is removed from the list, the most recent event done on the observable's collection is set to Add and then the observers of this observable are notified of the recent change in the form of an enum. Examples of *EventDataEnum* are for *ADD*, *REMOVE*, *ADDALL*, and *REMOVEALL*.

Consider an instant messaging service that holds a list of contacts in a collection such as a list. The service with the collection of contact names is the observable and the observers are the clients downloaded by the user to use the service on a variety of devices. The clients must have the information about the user's account details provided by the service. Observers can receive information in the form of an event. 

This event generated by the observer includes information about the operations occurring on the list. For the end user, the operations are adding and removing contacts from the current list of contact names. 

As these changes are made, observers of this collection are notified in real time and the client is kept up to date about the current service list every time the user accesses the service from the client. 

- Instant Messaging Service
	- Client on Desktop
	- Client on Web
	- Client on Mobile


